Docs: Interactivity API : New pages - About and FAQ (#61323)
WordPress/gutenberg: docs/reference-guides/interactivity-api/iapi-about.md

The main goal of the Interactivity API is to **provide a standard and simple way to handle the frontend interactivity of Gutenberg blocks**.

A standard makes it **easier for developers to create rich, interactive user experiences**, from simple cases like counters or popups to more complex features like instant page navigation, instant search, or carts and checkouts.

All these user experiences are technically possible right now without the Interactivity API. However, the more complex the user experience and the more blocks interact with each other, the harder it becomes for developers to build and maintain sites. There are a lot of challenges they have to figure out themselves. The API aims to provide out-of-the-box means for supporting these kinds of interactions.

To address this challenge the following requirements/goals for the Interactivity API were defined:

- **Block-first and PHP-first**: The API must work well with PHP and the current block system, including dynamic blocks, widely extended in WordPress. It must support server-side rendering. Server-rendered HTML and client-hydrated HTML must be exactly the same. This is important for SEO and the user experience.

> - **Backward compatible**: The API must be compatible with WordPress hooks, which could, for example, modify server-rendered HTML. It must also be compatible with internationalization and existing JS libraries on the site (such as jQuery).

Reviewer: It is compatible with any existing JS libraries, but it won't work out the box. 

If your block uses jQuery, it won't be compatible with client side navigation. Also, if you add any event with any external library, to any element that its visibility is handled by the Interactivity API, you need to control its behaviour by your self.

Reviewer 2: Compatibility with other blocks is mentioned in [the next line](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/61323/files#diff-fcd8a995f6703c8a130f5507361a3fb7ad50216febc9899718d0fd74c0eb9777R19). Maybe we can just remove that part from here.

Apart from that, I believe that client side navigation probably deserves a separate explanation at some point. It is a complex topic with some nuances.

Author: This section discusses the requirements/goals that were defined for the Interactivity API, so I think no further explanations are needed (as this is more of a wishlist). We could add links to other parts of the docs for more details and further explanations in other sections (more about specific implementations of these ideas).  

I think the idea of the Interactivity API's capacity to coexist with other libraries (such as jQuery) is a powerful one that should be highlighted as it would help with its "Optional and gradual adoption" as remarked in the following point.

> , I believe that client side navigation probably deserves a separate explanation at some point. It is a complex topic with some nuances.

I completely agree with this. This is already reflected in [these plans for the documentation 
](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/issues/53296#issuecomment-1911915212), and a dedicated section in the Docs will be added once client-side navigation can be fully implemented with the iAPI. In the meantime I'll provide a link to https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/issues/60951 to point to the progress on this work.

- **Atomic and composable**: Having small reusable parts that can be combined to create more complex systems is required to create flexible and scalable solutions.
- **Compatible with the existing block development tooling**: The API must be integrated with the existing block-building tools without requiring additional tooling or configuration by the developer.

Apart from all these requirements, integrating **client-side navigation** on top of any solution should be easy and performant. Client-side navigation is the process of navigating between site pages without reloading the entire page, which is one of the most impressive user experiences demanded by web developers. For that reason, this functionality should be compatible with this new system.

## Why directives?

Directives are the result of deep [research into different possibilities and approaches](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/interactivity-api/iapi-faq/#what-approaches-have-been-considered-instead-of-using-directives). We’ve found that this design covers the requirements most effectively.

### Block-first and PHP-friendly

> The API is designed for the world of blocks and takes WordPress history of being closely attached to web standards to heart.

Reviewer: I don't fully understand this sentence 😅

Author: Any suggestions for a better rephrasing?
cc: @SantosGuillamot @sirreal

Reviewer 3: I'm not really sure, maybe "designed to integrate seamlessly with blocks"? What's the part that's problematic, @cbravobernal? I do agree, it's hard to rephrase this because I'm not sure what exactly we're trying to express here. Should we draw a parallel where blocks are HTML markups + HTML comments, and directives are _just_ HTML attributes?

I'm not sure what PHP-friendly means, is this about server-side rendering?

> As directives are added to the HTML, they work great with dynamic blocks and PHP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As directives are HTML attributes, they are perfect for dynamic blocks and PHP.
```

_Dynamic block example_
```html
<div

>   data-wp-interactive='{ "namespace": "wpmovies" }'

Reviewer 3: We can use the string form here:

```suggestion
  data-wp-interactive="wpmovies"
```

Author: Fixed ✅

>   data-wp-context='{ "isOpen": false }'

Reviewer 3: This should use `wp_interactivity_data_wp_context`:

```suggestion
  <?php echo wp_interactivity_data_wp_context( array( 'isOpen' => false ) ); ?>
```

Reviewer 3: I think this suggestion was missed, let's always use the `wp_interactivity_data_wp_context` function, it's a best practice folks should follow.
```suggestion
  <?php echo wp_interactivity_data_wp_context( array( 'isOpen' => false ) ); ?>
```

  data-wp-watch="callbacks.logIsOpen"
>
  <button
    data-wp-on--click="actions.toggle"
    data-wp-bind--aria-expanded="context.isOpen"
    aria-controls="p-1"
  >
    Toggle
  </button>
 
  <p id="p-1" data-wp-show="context.isOpen">
    This element is now visible!
  </p>
</div>
```

As you can see, directives like `data-wp-on--click` or `data-wp-show` are added as custom HTML attributes. WordPress can process this HTML on the server, handling the directives’ logic and creating the appropriate markup.

### Backward compatible

As the Interactivity API works perfectly with server-side rendering, you can use all the WordPress APIs, including:

- **WordPress filters and actions**: You can keep using WordPress hooks to modify the HTML or even to modify directives. Additionally, existing hooks will keep working as expected.
- **Core Translation API**: e.g. `__()` and `_e()`. You can use it to translate the text in the HTML (as you normally would) and even use those APIs on the server side of your directives. 

### Optional and gradual adoption

> The Interactivity API pipeline promotes **progressive enhancement** by building on top of WordPress’s solid foundation and patterns. It was carefully designed not to force any use cases to pay for the costs of other use cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Interactivity API pipeline promotes **progressive enhancement** by building on top of WordPress’s solid foundation and patterns.
```

> For example, blocks with directives can coexist with other (interactive or non-interactive) blocks. This means that if there are other blocks on the page using other frameworks like jQuery, everything will work as expected.

Reviewer: Except full client side navigation. We can add the link to the "supports.interactivity" section.

Author: I have added a few [callouts](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/contributors/documentation/#callout-notices) to warn about this. Let me know what you think.

_Imperative code_

```html
<button id="toggle-button">Toggle Element</button>
<p>This element is now visible!</p>
<script>
  const button = document.getElementById("toggle-button");
 
  button.addEventListener("click", () => {
    const element = document.getElementById("element");
    if(element) {
      element.remove();
    } else {
      const newElement = document.createElement("p");
      newElement.textContent = "This element is visible";
      document.body.appendChild(newElement);
    }
});
</script>
```

_Declarative code_

This is the same use case shared above but serves as an example of declarative code using this new system. The JavaScript logic is defined in the `view.js` file of the block, and add the directives to the markup in the `render.php`.

```js
// view.js file
 
import { store, getContext } from "@wordpress/interactivity";
 
store( 'wpmovies', {
  actions: {
    toggle: () => {
      const context = getContext();
      context.isOpen = !context.isOpen;
    },
  },
});
```

```php
<!-- Render.php file -->
 
<div
  data-wp-interactive='wpmovies'

>   data-wp-context="{ 'isOpen': true }"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  <?php echo wp_interactivity_data_wp_context( array( 'isOpen' => true ) ); ?>
```

>   data-wp-context="{ 'isOpen': true }"

Reviewer 3: Same - string-only namespace and use the `wp_interactivity_data_wp_context` function.

>
  <button
    data-wp-on--click="actions.toggle"
    data-wp-bind--aria-expanded="context.ispen"
    aria-controls="p-1"
  >
    Toggle
  </button>
 
  <p id="p-1" data-wp-show="context.isOpen">
    This element is now visible!
  </p>
</div>
```

> Using imperative code may be easier when creating simple user experiences, but it becomes much more difficult as blocks become more complex. The Interactivity API must cover all use cases, from the simplest to the most challenging. That’s why a declarative approach using directives better fits the Interactivity API.

Reviewer 3: This is another chance to avoid being so block-centric:

```suggestion
Using imperative code may be easier when creating simple user experiences, but it becomes much more difficult as applications become more complex. The Interactivity API must cover all use cases, from the simplest to the most challenging. That’s why a declarative approach using directives better fits the Interactivity API.
```

### Performant

The API has been designed to be as performant as possible:

- **The runtime code needed for the directives is just ~10 KB**, and it only needs to be loaded once for all the blocks.

> - **It only loads the directives needed** by the blocks present on the page. For example, if no blocks are using data-wp-show, the code for this directive won’t be loaded.

Reviewer 3: This is repeated from the other page and I don't _think_ it's accurate.

> - **The scripts will load without blocking the page rendering**.

Reviewer 3: It might be good to always use "script modules"

### Atomic and composable

Each directive controls a small part of the DOM, and you can combine multiple directives to create rich, interactive user experiences.

### Compatible with the existing block development tooling

Using built-in directives does not require a build step and only requires a small runtime. A build step is necessary only when creating custom directives that return JSX. For such use cases, the API works out of the box with common block-building tools like [`wp-scripts`](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/packages/packages-scripts/).

### Client-side navigation

The Interactivity API comes with built-in primitives for adding client-side navigation to your site. This functionality is completely optional, but it opens the possibility to create these user experiences without having to opt out of the WordPress rendering system.

It also pairs very well with the [View Transitions API](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/web-platform/view-transitions/) allowing developers to animate page transitions easily.

## Why a standard?

> Blocks using the Interactivity API and interactive blocks using other approaches like jQuery can coexist, and everything will work as expected. However, the Interactivity API comes with some benefits for your interactive blocks:

Reviewer: Again, beware of client side navigation.

Author: See https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/61323#discussion_r1590755874

> - **Blocks can communicate with each other easily**. With a standard, this communication is handled by default. When different blocks use different approaches to frontend interactivity, inter-block communication becomes more complex and almost impossible when separate developers create blocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Blocks can communicate with each other easily**. With a standard, this communication is handled by default. When different blocks use different approaches to frontend interactivity, inter-block communication becomes more complex and almost impossible when different developers create blocks.
```
